GSoC 2022 Report Article (#1432)
scala/scala-lang: blog/_posts/2022-11-20-gsoc-report.md

> ---

Author: Not really, just put a random date in the future :) I'll post it when there is no more feedback coming.

layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Anatolii Kmetiuk, Scala Center
title: "Google Summer of Code 2022: How It Was"
---

> We've recently completed another successful Google Summer of Code program. Designed to bring more beginners into programming communities, the program is a part of Scala Center's strategy to make the Scala language more newcomer-friendly.

Reviewer: I don’t think the goal is to make Scala more newcomer-friendly with GSoC. I would rather say that the goal is to onboard new contributors to the Scala ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: I rather like this part, and it is correct that our participation in GSoC is a part/ one of the pieces of our strategy to make Scala lang more newcomer-friendly.

> We've recently completed another successful Google Summer of Code program. Designed to bring more beginners into programming communities, the program is a part of Scala Center's strategy to make the Scala language more newcomer-friendly.

Author: ```suggestion
We've recently completed another successful Google Summer of Code program. Designed to bring more beginners into programming communities, the program is a part of Scala Center's strategy to make contributing to the Scala language more newcomer-friendly.
```

> We've recently completed another successful Google Summer of Code program. Designed to bring more beginners into programming communities, the program is a part of Scala Center's strategy to make the Scala language more newcomer-friendly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We've recently completed another successful Google Summer of Code program. Designed to bring more beginners into programming communities, the participation in the program is a part of Scala Center's strategy to make the Scala language more newcomer-friendly.
```

The program isn't the Scala Center's.

Overall, Liangyong's work makes Scala Native builds even more performant time- and memory-wise, which will be especially interesting for the developers of large codebases. You can find out more in Liangyong's [report](https://github.com/yuly16/Scala-Native-GSoC-Report).

## Doodle Explore
[Scala Doodle](https://github.com/creativescala/doodle) is a compositional graphics library for generative art in Scala that enables users to declaratively create art pieces and other visualizations. A Doodle graphic is generally parameterized by one or more variables such as stroke width and background color, or sometimes something more domain-specific like the magnitude of gravity or iterations of a fractal. In any of these cases, the creator of a graphic may want to use a GUI for changing the parameters to fine-tune the art piece or provide a means to make the graphic interactive.

> Mikail Khan, mentored by Noel Welsh, developed such a GUI during the Summer of 2022 – have a look at this [documentation microsite](https://creativescala.github.io/doodle-explore/) for a quick demo.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mikail Khan, mentored by Noel Welsh, developed a domain-specific language for describing GUIs during the Summer of 2022 – have a look at this [documentation microsite](https://creativescala.github.io/doodle-explore/) for a quick demo.
```

The project will be especially interesting for Scala educators. For experienced and novice programmers alike, it's important to quickly get feedback on what your code is doing – this is how we learn. Even more so it is important for people who have just started their journey in programming. Having a visual feedback you can play with is a great feature that can be used to teach Scala to newcomers.

The final report for this project is available [here](https://static.mikail-khan.com/gsoc-report/).

> ## Towards Scalafix cross-compilation to Scala 3

Reviewer 4: Cross-compilation is done as of https://github.com/scalacenter/scalafix/pull/1650
```suggestion
## Towards Scala 3 support for Scalafix `ExplicitResultTypes`: cross-compiling to Scala 3
```

> Scalafix is a linting, code completion, and rewriting tool for Scala codebases. It is an important migration tool that makes it easier for Scala 2 users to migrate to Scala 3.

Reviewer 4: - I wouldn't talk about scala 2 to scala 3 migration as it hasn't been the focus (as opposed to scalafmt & https://github.com/scalacenter/scala3-migrate)
- I would leave out "code completion" as it's very much IDE-oriented
```suggestion
Scalafix is a linting and rewriting tool for Scala codebases. `ExplicitResultTypes` is one of the built-in rule, which inserts type annotations for inferred public members.
```

> Scalafix currently cross-compiles for Scala 2.11, 2.12, and 2.13. Having it cross-compile to Scala 3 is challenging for a number of reasons but is important. Cross-compilation to Scala 3 would mean that the rules written in Scala 3 will be compatible and compilable in Scala 2.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unlike most rules that only rely on the Scalafix & SemanticDB APIs, `ExplicitResultTypes` also depends on the Scala presentation compiler, requiring users to run Scalafix with the Scala binary version targeted by the source files they want to annotate. As Scalafix is currently only cross-compiled to Scala 2.11, 2.12 and 2.13, it's not trivial to interact with the Scala 3 compiler and thus `ExplicitResultTypes` cannot run on Scala 3 source files.
```

Reviewer 4: (for consistency, I sticked to cross-compile *to* rather than ~for~ as it was the one used in the title, but I don't know what's the preferred preposition, or even if there is a difference between both)

> Razvan Vacaru, mentored by Brice Jaglin and Meriam Lachkar made a significant progress in this area by making it possible for a couple of Scalafix modules to cross-compile to Scala 3. You can find a detailed report [here](https://github.com/rvacaru/GsoC-2022-Scalafix).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Razvan Vacaru, mentored by Brice Jaglin and Meriam Lachkar made a significant progress towards the goal of supporting Scala 3 in `ExplicitResultTypes` by cross-compiling all Scalafix modules to Scala 3. You can find a detailed report [here](https://github.com/rvacaru/GsoC-2022-Scalafix).
```

> Razvan Vacaru, mentored by Brice Jaglin and Meriam Lachkar made a significant progress in this area by making it possible for a couple of Scalafix modules to cross-compile to Scala 3. You can find a detailed report [here](https://github.com/rvacaru/GsoC-2022-Scalafix).

Reviewer 5: All Scalafix modules are now cross compiled actually (see [merged pr](https://github.com/scalacenter/scalafix/pull/1650))
I'll update my final report as well.

## Semantic Highlighting in Metals
Semantic Highlighting is a part of the default LSP (Language Server Protocol – what connects Metals to your favorite code editor to bring all nice developer experience to you) spec, which is not yet supported by Metals. This would allow the highlighting of tokens (keywords etc.) based on the semantic information about the code. This is especially useful with things like soft keywords in Scala 3, but not only.

> Semantic Highlighting is a long-standing [feature request](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-feature-requests/issues/57) in Metals. Having a finer-grained, smarter code highlighting would enhance the developer experience, making Scala even more pleasant to work with.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Semantic Highlighting is a long-standing [feature request](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-feature-requests/issues/57) in Metals. Having a finer-grained, smarter code highlighting would enhance the developer experience, making Scala even more pleasant to work with across all the different editors.
```
